		Off-the-Record Messaging plugin for GAIM
			  v2.0.2,  3 May 2005

This is a gaim plugin which implements Off-the-Record (OTR) Messaging.
It is known to work (at least) under the Linux and Windows versions of
gaim (1.x).

OTR allows you to have private conversations over IM by providing:
 - Encryption
   - No one else can read your instant messages.
 - Authentication
   - You are assured the correspondent is who you think it is.
 - Deniability
   - The messages you send do _not_ have digital signatures that are
     checkable by a third party.  Anyone can forge messages after a
     conversation to make them look like they came from you.  However,
     _during_ a conversation, your correspondent is assured the messages
     he sees are authentic and unmodified.
 - Perfect forward secrecy
   - If you lose control of your private keys, no previous conversation
     is compromised.

For more information on Off-the-Record Messaging, see
http://www.cypherpunks.ca/otr/

USAGE

Run gaim, and open the Preferences panel.  (If you had a copy of gaim
running before you installed gaim-otr, you will need to restart it.)
Choose "Plugins".  Find the Off-the-Record Messaging plugin, and enable
it by selecting the "Load" box next to it.  This will cause
"Off-the-Record Messaging" to appear under "Plugins" in the list at the
left.  Click "Off-the-Record Messaging" to bring up the OTR UI.  The UI
has two "pages": "Known fingerprints" and "Config".

The "Config" page allows you generate private keys, and to set OTR
options.

    Private keys are used to authenticate you to your buddies.  Choose
    one of your accounts from the menu, click "Generate" and wait until
    it's finished.  You'll see a sequence of letters and number appear
    above the "Generate" button.  This is the "fingerprint" for that
    account; it is unique to that account.  If you have multiple IM
    accounts, you can generate private keys for each one separately.
    Note that if you don't generate keys in this way, they will be
    generated automatically, when they are needed.

    The OTR options determine when private messaging is enabled.  The
    checkboxes on this page control the default settings; you can edit
    the per-buddy settings by right-clicking on your buddy in the buddy
    list, and choosing "OTR Options" from the menu.

    The options are:
    [X] Enable private messaging
      [X] Automatically initiate private messaging
        [ ] Require private messaging

    If the "enable private messaging" box is unchecked, private messages
    will be disabled completely (and the other two boxes will be greyed
    out, as they're irrelevant).

    If the first box is checked, but "automatically initiate private
    messaging" is unchecked, private messaging will be enabled, but only
    if either you or your buddy explicitly requests to start a private
    conversation (and the third box will be greyed out, as it's
    irrelevant).

    If the first two boxes are checked, but "require private messaging"
    is unchecked, OTR will attempt to detect whether your buddy can
    understand OTR private messages, and if so, automatically start a
    private conversation.

    If all three boxes are checked, messages will not be sent to your
    buddy unless you are in a private conversation.

The "Known fingerprints" page allows you to see the fingerprints of any
buddies you have previously communicated with privately.

You can close the Preferences panel (but make sure not to disable
(un-"Load") the OTR plugin).

IM as normal with your buddies.  If you want to start a private
conversation with one of them, click the "OTR: Not Private" button in
the conversation window.

If your buddy does not have the OTR plugin, a private conversation will
(of course) not be started.  [But he'll get some information about OTR
instead.]

If your buddy does have the OTR plugin (and it's enabled), a private
conversation will be initiated.

If both you and your buddy have OTR software, and your OTR options set
to automatically initiate private messaging, your clients may recognize
each other and automatically start a private conversation.

The first time you have a private conversation with one of your buddies,
his fingerprint will appear, and you will be asked to verify that it is
valid.  It's usually a good idea to make sure it's correct, perhaps via
the phone, or some other authenticated communication.

If it's wrong, it means someone's intercepting your communication.
While unlikely, this is one of the things this plugin detects.

Once you've verified your buddy's fingerprint, it will be stored, and
future private conversations with him won't bother you with this dialog.
[Unless, of course, he uses a different fingerprint, perhaps from a
different IM account, or on a different computer.  It's OK to have
multiple fingerprints for the same IM account, on different machines.]

When private communication has been established, you each will see an
information popup containing:
 - Your buddy's screen name  (he'll see yours, of course)
 - His fingerprint  (similarly, he'll see yours)
 - A "secure id" for the session.  Half of this id will be in bold.
   Your buddy sees the same id, but the other half is in bold for him.

The "secure id" is another way to verify that you're actually chatting
with your buddy, and not some eavesdropper ("man-in-the-middle" is the
technical term).  Phone him up, and ask him to read his bold part, and
read yours back to him.  If they're both correct, you're assured that
there's no one intercepting your private conversation.  This is secure,
even if you know that one or both of your private keys have been
compromised.

Then just use IM with him normally; all your instant messages will be
encrypted and authenticated.  You should see an "OTR: Private" label in
the conversation window.

If you open the Preferences panel back up, and go to the OTR UI, you'll
see your buddy, and his fingerprint, listed there.  The "Status" should
currently be "Private", which means you're having a private
conversation.  Other possibilities are "Not private", which means you're
just chatting in IM the usual (non-OTR) way, and "Setting up", which
means the private conversation is in the process of being set up.

By selecting one of your buddies from the list, you'll be able to do one
or more of the following things by clicking the buttons below the list:
 - "Start private conversation": if the status is "Not private", this
   will attempt to start a private conversation.  It's the same as
   typing "?OTR?" to your buddy.
 - "End private conversation": if the status is "Private" (or "Setting
   up"), you can force an end to your private conversation by clicking
   this button.  There's not usually a good reason to do this, though.
   Note that your buddy will have to click the button at his end, as
   well.  [This is so he doesn't inadvertently type a message he thinks
   is private, when suddenly the privacy is removed from him.]  When you
   end a private conversation, you'll see a warning box to that effect.
 - "Forget fingerprint": this will remove your buddy's fingerprint from
   the list.  You'll have to re-verify it the next time you start a
   private conversation with him.  Note that you can't forget a
   fingerprint that's currently in use in a private conversation.

NOTES

Please send your bug reports, comments, suggestions, patches, etc. to us
at the contact address below.

This plugin only attempts to protect instant messages, not multi-party
chats, file transfers, etc.

MAILING LISTS

There are three mailing lists pertaining to Off-the-Record Messaging:

otr-announce:
    http://lists.cypherpunks.ca/mailman/listinfo/otr-announce/
    *** All users of OTR software should join this. ***  It is used to
    announce new versions of OTR software, and other important information.

otr-users:
    http://lists.cypherpunks.ca/mailman/listinfo/otr-users/
    Discussion of usage issues related to OTR Messaging software.

otr-dev:
    http://lists.cypherpunks.ca/mailman/listinfo/otr-dev/
    Discussion of OTR Messaging software development.

LICENSE

The Off-the-Record Messaging plugin for gaim is covered by the following
(GPL) license:

    Off-the-Record Messaging plugin for gaim
    Copyright (C) 2004-2005  Nikita Borisov and Ian Goldberg
		             <otr@cypherpunks.ca>

    This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
    it under the terms of version 2 of the GNU General Public License as
    published by the Free Software Foundation.

    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
    GNU General Public License for more details.

    There is a copy of the GNU General Public License in the COPYING file
    packaged with this plugin; if you cannot find it, write to the Free
    Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA
    02111-1307  USA

CONTACT

To report problems, comments, suggestions, patches, etc., you can email
the authors:

Nikita Borisov and Ian Goldberg <otr@cypherpunks.ca>

For more information on Off-the-Record Messaging, visit
http://www.cypherpunks.ca/otr/
